Schema Configuration documentation (#3349)
neo4j/graphql: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc

[[schema-configuration-type-configuration]]
= Type Configuration

> A GraphQL Object type, representing a Neo4j Node, produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A GraphQL Object type, representing a Neo4j Node, produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types, for example:
```

> Let's consider the following type definitions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

From this type definitions, the library generates the following operation fields:

**Query**:

    * `movies`
    * `moviesAggregate`
    * `moviesConnection`

**Mutation**:

    * `createMovies`
    * `deleteMovies`
    * `updateMovies`

**Subscription**:

    * `movieCreated`
    * `movieUpdated`
    * `movieDeleted`
.

This section explains how to reduce the operation fields produced using the directives `@query`, `@mutation`, `@subscription`.

== `@query`

> This directive instructs the library to limit the operations available in the Query type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This directive is used to limit the availability of query operations in the library.
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
directive @query(read: Boolean! = true, aggregate: Boolean! = true) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

> NOTE: Please note that aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library. TODO: Check migration guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
Aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library. 
====

// TODO: Check migration guide
```

=== Usage

> ==== Disable movies and moviesConnection operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Disable _movies_ and _moviesConnection_ operations
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @query(read: false, aggregate: true) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

> ==== Disable moviesAggregate operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Disable _moviesAggregate_ operations
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @query(read: true, aggregate: false)  { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

== `@mutation`

> This directive instructs the library to limit the operations available in the Mutation type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This directive is used to limit the availability of Mutation operations in the library.
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum MutationFields {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
}

directive @mutation(operations: [MutationFields!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE]) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

=== Usage

> ==== Disable create, delete, and update operations for Movie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Disable create, delete, and update operations for _Movie_
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @mutation(operations: []) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

> ==== Enable only create operations for Movie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Enable only Create operations for _Movie_
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @mutation(operations: [CREATE]) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

== `@subscription`

> This directive instructs the library to limit the operations available in the Subscription type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This directive is used to limit Subscription operations in the library.
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum SubscriptionFields {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
    CREATE_RELATIONSHIP
    DELETE_RELATIONSHIP
}

directive @subscription(operations: [SubscriptionFields!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE, CREATE_RELATIONSHIP, DELETE_RELATIONSHIP]) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

=== Usage

> ==== Disable subscriptions for Movie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Disable subscriptions for _Movie_
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @subscription(operations: [])  { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

==== Enable only movieCreated subscription for Movie

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @subscription(operations: [CREATE]) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

> == `@exclude`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== `@exclude` label:deprecated[]
```

> NOTE: label:deprecated[] **@exclude** directive is deprecated. Please use the **@query**, **@mutation**, and **@subscription** directives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This directive skips the generation of queries and/or subscriptions and/or particular/all mutations for the specified type.

[NOTE]
====
This directive is deprecated.
Use the xref:type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration/#_query[`@query`], xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration/#_mutation[`@mutation`], and xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration/#_subscription[`@subscription`] directives instead.
====
```

> This directive skips the generation of queries and/or subscriptions and/or particular/all mutations for the specified type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum ExcludeOperation {
    CREATE
    READ
    UPDATE
    DELETE
    SUBSCRIBE
}

"""Instructs @neo4j/graphql to exclude the specified operations from query, mutation and subscription generation. If used without an argument, no queries, mutations or subscriptions will be generated for this type."""
directive @exclude(
    operations: [ExcludeOperation!]! = [CREATE, READ, UPDATE, DELETE, SUBSCRIBE]
) on OBJECT
----

=== Usage

==== Disable Query field generation

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User @exclude(operations: [READ]) {
    name: String
}
----

==== Disable single Mutation field generation

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User @exclude(operations: [CREATE]) {
    name: String
}
----

==== Disable multiple Mutation field generation

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User @exclude(operations: [CREATE, DELETE]) {
    name: String
}
----

==== Disable Subscription field generation

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User @exclude(operations: [SUBSCRIBE]) {
    name: String
}
----

> ==== Disable all Query, Mutation and Subscription field generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Disable all Query, Mutation, and Subscription field generation
```

> The following two type definitions are equivalent in the fact that no queries, mutations, or subscriptions will be generated for either of them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following two type definitions are equivalent in the sense that no queries, mutations, or subscriptions will be generated for either of them:
```

[[schema-configuration-type-configuration]]
= Type Configuration

> A GraphQL Object type, representing a Neo4j Node, produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types, for example:

Reviewer: Is "node" here the name of something (like a product or a tool) or is it just a regular node? If the latter is correct, then we should opt for lower case.

```suggestion
When representing a Neo4j Node, a GraphQL Object type produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types. 
For example:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

> From this type definitions, the library generates the following operation fields:

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should use singular or plural form here. I've seen the same expression before, but thought about this only now. 

```suggestion
From these type definitions, the library generates the following operation fields:
```

or 

```suggestion
From this type definition, the library generates the following operation fields:
```

**Query**:

    * `movies`
    * `moviesAggregate`
    * `moviesConnection`

**Mutation**:

    * `createMovies`
    * `deleteMovies`
    * `updateMovies`

**Subscription**:

    * `movieCreated`
    * `movieUpdated`
    * `movieDeleted`
.

> This section explains how to reduce the operation fields produced using the directives `@query`, `@mutation`, `@subscription`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains how to reduce the operation fields produced using the directives `@query`, `@mutation`, and `@subscription`.
```

== `@query`

This directive is used to limit the availability of query operations in the library.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
directive @query(read: Boolean! = true, aggregate: Boolean! = true) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

> NOTE: Please note that aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library. See xref::guides/v4-migration/index.adoc#opt-in-aggregation[`Opt-in Aggregation`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
Aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library. 
See xref::guides/v4-migration/index.adoc#opt-in-aggregation[`Opt-in Aggregation`] for more information.
====
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum MutationFields {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
}

directive @mutation(operations: [MutationFields!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE]) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

=== Usage

==== Disable create, delete, and update operations for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @mutation(operations: []) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

==== Enable only Create operations for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @mutation(operations: [CREATE]) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

== `@subscription`

This directive is used to limit Subscription operations in the library.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum SubscriptionFields {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
    CREATE_RELATIONSHIP
    DELETE_RELATIONSHIP
}

directive @subscription(operations: [SubscriptionFields!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE, CREATE_RELATIONSHIP, DELETE_RELATIONSHIP]) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

=== Usage

==== Disable subscriptions for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @subscription(operations: [])  { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

> ==== Enable only movieCreated subscription for Movie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Enable only _movieCreated_ subscription for _Movie_
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @subscription(operations: [CREATE]) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

== `@exclude` label:deprecated[]

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to have a sentence or two defining what this is before the note about the deprecation

Author: Good spot, I reuse the previous description that was mistakenly removed!

[NOTE]
====
This directive is deprecated.

Use the  xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_mutation[`@mutation`], and xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_subscription[`@subscription`] directives instead.
====

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[[schema-configuration-type-configuration]]
= Type Configuration

A GraphQL Object type, representing a Neo4j Node, produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types, for example:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

From these type definitions, the library generates the following operation fields:

**Query**:

    * `movies`
    * `moviesAggregate`
    * `moviesConnection`

**Mutation**:

    * `createMovies`
    * `deleteMovies`
    * `updateMovies`

**Subscription**:

    * `movieCreated`
    * `movieUpdated`
    * `movieDeleted`
.

This section explains how to reduce the operation fields produced using the directives `@query`, `@mutation`, and `@subscription`.

== `@query`

This directive is used to limit the availability of query operations in the library.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
directive @query(read: Boolean! = true, aggregate: Boolean! = true) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

[NOTE]
====

> Aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.0.0 version of the library. 
```

[[schema-configuration-type-configuration]]
= Type Configuration

When representing a Neo4j Node, a GraphQL Object type produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types. 
For example:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

From these type definitions, the library generates the following operation fields:

**Query**:

    * `movies`
    * `moviesAggregate`
    * `moviesConnection`

**Mutation**:

    * `createMovies`
    * `deleteMovies`
    * `updateMovies`

> **Subscription**:

Author: Had a chat with @angrykoala about it, seems that the part of the migration guides where we describe these changes on the current subscription plugin is missing. I don't know if it will be better to include it in this PR or in a separate one tho.

=== Usage

==== Disable Create, Delete, and Update operations for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @mutation(operations: []) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

==== Enable only Create operations for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @mutation(operations: [CREATE]) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

== `@subscription`

This directive is used to limit Subscription operations in the library.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum SubscriptionFields {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
    CREATE_RELATIONSHIP
    DELETE_RELATIONSHIP
}

directive @subscription(operations: [SubscriptionFields!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE, CREATE_RELATIONSHIP, DELETE_RELATIONSHIP]) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
----

=== Usage

==== Disable subscriptions for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @subscription(operations: [])  { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

==== Enable only _movieCreated_ subscription for _Movie_

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @subscription(operations: [CREATE]) { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

== `@exclude` label:deprecated[]

[NOTE]
====
This directive is deprecated.

> Use the  xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_mutation[`@mutation`], and xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_subscription[`@subscription`] directives instead.

Reviewer: Sorry, I left an extra space here 😅

```suggestion
Use the xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_mutation[`@mutation`], and xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_subscription[`@subscription`] directives instead.
```

> Use the xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_mutation[`@mutation`] and the xref:/type-definitions/schema-configuration/type-configuration.adoc#_subscription[`@subscription`] directives instead.

Author: Right!

[[schema-configuration-type-configuration]]
= Type Configuration

When representing a Neo4j Node, a GraphQL Object type produces multiple operation fields in the `Query`, `Mutation`, and `Subscription` types. 
For example:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie { 
    title: String 
    length: Int
}
----

From these type definitions, the library generates the following operation fields:

**Query**:

    * `movies`
    * `moviesAggregate`
    * `moviesConnection`

**Mutation**:

    * `createMovies`
    * `deleteMovies`
    * `updateMovies`

**Subscription**:

    * `movieCreated`
    * `movieUpdated`
    * `movieDeleted`
.

This section explains how to reduce the operation fields produced using the directives `@query`, `@mutation`, and `@subscription`.

== `@query`

This directive is used to limit the availability of query operations in the library.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----

> directive @query(read: Boolean! = true, aggregate: Boolean! = true) on OBJECT | SCHEMA

Reviewer 2: This is defaulted to `false`, however, in version 3.x aggregations are generated if no `@query` is present. The breaking change comes when aggregations are not generated even when `@query` is not used

```suggestion
directive @query(read: Boolean! = true, aggregate: Boolean! = false) on OBJECT | SCHEMA
```

Author: Ouch, nice catch!
